\input texinfo
@c guile-xlib.texi
@c
@c	Copyright (C) 2002 Thien-Thi Nguyen
@c
@c This file is part of guile-xlib.
@c
@c guile-xlib is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
@c any later version.
@c
@c guile-xlib is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with this software; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
@c the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330,
@c Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA

@c %**start of header
@setfilename guile-xlib.info
@settitle Guile-Xlib Reference Manual
@set guile
@set MANUAL_EDITION 0.4
@c %**end of header

@c + @include version.texi
@c + @include doc-macros.texi

@c @iftex
@c @cropmarks
@c @end iftex

@dircategory The Algorithmic Language Scheme
@direntry
* Guile-Xlib Reference: (guile-xlib).     Using libX11 from Guile.
@end direntry

@setchapternewpage off

@ifinfo
Guile Reference Manual
Copyright (C) 2002 Thien-Thi Nguyen

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Free Software Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@comment The title is printed in a large font.
@title Guile-Xlib Reference Manual
@subtitle Edition @value{MANUAL_EDITION}, for use with Guile-Xlib @value{VERSION}
@c - @subtitle $Id: guile.texi,v 1.4 2002/08/29 05:34:04 ttn Exp $

@c AUTHORS

@author Thien-Thi Nguyen
@author @email{ttn@@gnu.org}

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Thien-Thi Nguyen

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@c @smallbook
@finalout
@headings double

@c Where to find Guile-Xlib examples.
@c + @set example-dir doc/examples

@ifnottex
@node Top, Guile-Xlib License, (dir), (dir)
@top The Guile-Xlib Reference Manual

This reference manual documents Guile-Xlib, a set of libX11 bindings
and enhancements for Guile Scheme.  It describes how to use Guile-Xlib in
many useful and interesting ways.

This Info file contains edition @value{MANUAL_EDITION} of the reference
manual, corresponding to Guile version @value{VERSION}.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Guile-Xlib License::          Conditions for copying and using Guile-Xlib.
* Enhancement Philosophy::      Guile-Xlib is more than a thin layer.
* Function Reference::          As many as can fit in xlib.c!
* Index::
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Guile-Xlib License
@chapter Guile-Xlib License

Guile-Xlib was written by Neil Jerram.   It is released under GNU GPL.
Thank you, Neil!

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Enhancement Philosophy
@chapter Enhancement Philosophy

Guile-Xlib is more than a thin layer.  This section is a compilation of
comments by Neil on exactly what that means.

@section Extra Resource Tracking
@cindex differences, this interface and raw Xlib in C

Some differences are inevitable.  When the power of Xlib is made
available in an general purpose interpreted environment like Guile,
we need to make sure that the interface cannot be called in a way
that would cause the environment as a whole to crash or hang.  For
example, in C you can call XCloseDisplay and then, say,
XDestroyWindow for the display that you have just closed; and your
program will probably hang or crash as a result.  An interface like
the one implemented here must protect the environment against such
problems by detecting and rejecting invalid usage.

In practice, this means that the interface needs to track the
current state of X resources like displays and windows.  So the
Guile Xlib interface differs from C Xlib at least in that it stores
certain additional state information and uses this information to
detect and disallow invalid usage.

Given that some difference is inevitable, one piece of Schemely
behaviour is sufficiently useful - and sufficiently easier to
implement in this interface than in a Scheme layer above it - that
it merits a further small departure from C Xlib.  This is the
automatic freeing of X resources when the interface-level objects
associated with them are garbage collected.  It applies to displays
(using XCloseDisplay), windows (XDestroyWindow) and non-default gcs
(XFreeGC).  Note that it is still possible to free these resources
explicitly, using the x-close-display!, x-destroy-window! and
x-free-gc! primitives respectively.

Many further differences (between this interface and C Xlib) are
possible, but none are compelling.  The X people presumably thought
quite carefully about the structure and completeness of the Xlib
interface, and that's worth benefitting from.  Layers presenting a
graphical X interface with a different structure, or from a
different angle, can easily be implemented in Scheme on top of
this one.

@section Garbage Collection
@cindex garbage collection

The one wrinkle in implementing automatic freeing of X resources is
that almost all X resources depend on a valid display, so we have
to be careful that the display resource is always freed (using
XCloseDisplay) last of all.

In most cases this is handled by having resource smobs include a
reference to the display smob.  But there is still a problem when
all remaining X resource references are dropped between one GC
cycle and the next: when this happens, the next GC sweep could free
the display smob before it gets to some of the other resource
smobs.

Fortunately, resource smobs can check, in their free functions,
whether this has happened, by looking at the SCM_TYP16 of their
reference to the display smob.  If the display smob is still valid,
this will be scm_tc16_xdisplay, and the relevant X resource should
be freed as normal.  If the display smob has been freed earlier in
this sweep, GC will have set its SCM_TYP16 to scm_tc_free_cell;
this indicates that XCloseDisplay has already been called, and so
the relevant X resource no longer needs to be freed.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Function Reference
@chapter Function Reference

@include xlib.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Index
@chapter Index

This index contains concepts, keywords and non-Schemey names for several
features, to make it easier to locate the desired sections.

@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

@contents

@bye

@c guile-xlib.texi ends here
